World War II was the watershed event for higher education in modern western societies. (46)
Those societies came out of the war with levels of enrollment that had been roughly constant at
3-5% of the relevant age groups during the decades before the war. But after the war, great social
and political changes arising out of the successful war against Fascism created a growing demand
in European and American economies for increasing numbers of graduates with more than a secondary school education. (47) And the demand that rose in those societies for entry to higher
education extended to groups and social classes that had not thought of attending to a university
before the war. These demands resulted in a very rapid expansion of the systems of higher
education, beginning in the 1960s and developing very rapidly though unevenly in the 1970s and
1980s.
The growth of higher education manifests itself in at least three quite different ways, and
these in turn have given rise to different sets of problems. There was first the rate of growth: (48)
in many countries of Western Europe the numbers of students in higher education doubled within
five-year periods during the decade of the 1960s and doubled again in seven, eight, or 10years by
the middle of the 1970s. Second, growth obviously affected the absolute size both of systems and
individual institutions. And third, growth was reflected in changes in the proportion of the
relevant age group enrolled in institutions of higher education.
Each of these manifestations of growth carried its own peculiar problems in its wake. For
example, a high growth rate placed great strains on the existing structures of governance, of
administration, and above all of socialization. When a very large proportion of all the members of
an institution are new recruits, they threaten to overwhelm the processes whereby recruits to a
more slowly growing system are inducted into its value system and learn its norms and forms.
When a faculty or department grows from, say, five to 20members within three or four years, (49)
and when the new staff are predominantly young men and women fresh from postgraduate study,
they largely define the norms of academic life in that faculty and its standards. And if the
postgraduate student population also grows rapidly and there is loss of a close apprenticeship
relationship between faculty members and students, the student culture becomes the chief
socializing force for new postgraduate students, with consequences for the intellectual and
academic life of the institution—this was seen in America as well as in France, Italy, West
Germany, and Japan. (50) High growth rates increased the chances for academic innovation; they
also weakened the forms and processes by which teachers and students are admitted into a community of scholars during periods of stability or slow growth. In the 1960s and 1970s,
European universities saw marked changes in their governance arrangements, with the
empowerment of junior faculty and to some degree of students as well. They also saw higher
levels of student discontent, reflecting the weakening of traditional forms of academic
communities.